Today, film and TV series are so readily available, and accessible, not just in our language but we can see films in any language across the globe. And we watch it. One ends and we start the 2nd one. The 2nd ends and we start the 3rd one We consume film like junk food. As soon as, one character makes space in us,  we get engrossed in the next story. But a genuine director doesn't want people to just watch his film and forget about it. He wants the story to get immersed into you. It should travel within you. His characters should stay within you for some days. In fact, he will want you to rewatch it. Some films need to be watched at least twice  to understand them. Director has made it with that intention only. Things are presented on so many layers that Until we watch it twice, a lot of things will not open up. Because there are films which change with time. This means that as with time  our situation changes our perspective also changes in regard to that film. Fight Club is one of them. If you watch it in your teenage, you will take it as a rebellion. A revolt against the systems of society. And you would agree too. If you watch it after some time, after having some responsibilities in your life, then you might find this film as irresponsibility. Pure Recklessness. And if you watch it later again someday, then you may find it to be a satire too. As if the entire film is  roasting Tyler Durden. Making fun of his juvenile rebellion. Because the more we rewatch a film the more we lose our subjective influence on it. Now instead of keeping ourselves at the center of the film slowly we go near the point of view of the writer/director. We try to understand their intention. And if you watch Fight Club many times then it feels like the film doesn't celebrate Tyler Durden but it warns us. When Fight Club was released in 1999, it didn't perform that well at the Box office. But slowly, it seems as if Tyler Durden had gathered a crowd in real life. There are many people who celebrate Tyler Durden and identifies with him. There is something about Tyler which is very infectious. The narrator's life, whose this story is about, is filled with a dilemma. With a conflicting mind. He wants to do something but  has to do something else. He seeks freedom but is addicted to slavery. He is upset with life, but cannot get rid of it either. He is completely bored with his life And this boredom and conflict in his life  manifest Tyler Durden. Tyler Durden emerges from the conflict between what the narrator thinks he should feel, and what he does. The narrator is exhausted from doing things. We are taught our entire life that we need to do something. Whoever we go to says the same thing. Do something As if we cannot even call ourselves a person if we don't do anything. As if the way we are is incomplete and  by doing something, we will be complete. And with this mindset,  we run our entire life, with this hope that   we will become something or will do something or will find someone who will complete us. But, we gradually realize that anything that we lay our hands on turns ordinary and mundane eventually And what we don't have, we feel the lack of it  and start chasing it. And this is a kind of slavery where  we do not even realize that we are slaves. It is the worst kind of prison where  we are not even aware that we have been imprisoned. Tyler Durden frees the   narrator from this mental prison. Tyler Durden is the narrator's unconflicted state. A state where he does not care about the formalities, or the society. Where what he wants he wants, and what he doesn't want, he doesn't want, which is disliked can be  and must be avoided and what is enjoyed must be enjoyed with exactitude and ferocious intensity. He stops caring about  how people perceive him. He has had enough of it  and can't take this anymore. He now has to do something that can make him alive. Something that can bring him into the present moment and bring him out of his unconscious life. And what can be easier than pain  to make someone alert and present? Lord Buddha throughout his entire life made a huge emphasis on breathing. He always taught his disciples to focus on breathing. Make a string of beads out of your breath and pay attention to its flow. We can practice living in the present moment by paying attention to our breath. Osho says that his entire experiment is him trying to  splash cold water on people's faces in order to awaken them. Tyler is trying to do something similar. He is also trying to awaken the narrator,   but by hurting him; by punching him in the face. He also wants to bring the narrator out of his  unconscious lifestyle and free him from the  worries about the future and the past. He teaches him that there is a   difference between him and his possessions. You are not the things you own. Every year, car owners are killed or seriously injured  in their attempts to stop the theft of their vehicles Humans have a particularly strong and, at times, irrational obsession with possessions. The things that we  assume would give us peace after we possess them,  end up possessing our peace. The things we own end up owning us. They become the reason for our mental chaos. Tyler's way is a little strange or maybe even stupid. But he also wants the narrator to experience every moment, so that he has a direct authentic visceral experience of reality. Experiences the freedom  of each moment. He should be able to drop his ego.  He should be able to view his ordinariness. And if still he doesn't understand, then, when he will get  punched on the jaw &  when the skin sheds off  the flesh & starts bleeding and when he sees his  body parts falling apart. Then he will definitely understand  that he is not special. Even our situation is somewhat similar. There is a disconnection  where we are and our mind is. Even we are not completely  present anywhere and this is one of the major  reasons behind our exhaustion. The fundamental reason behind not being at peace and being anxious is being unconscious and being lost. If we start doing every work in our everyday life consciously, being awake, then we can bring  a huge change in ourselves and then we can make  our mind peaceful and take it in our control and  increase our efficiency in everything. If you want to learn more about how to do it and how to practice it, then you can learn that through a great book named,  " The Miracle of mindfulness". This is a book written by a Zen master where meditation and mindfulness have been explained  in a very detailed way. It talks about exercises as well so that we can bring it into our practice. Also, you can listen to it's book summary on the Kuku FM app where you can understand this in Hindi and other regional languages in a more simplified manner. People started joining the fight club to feel alive again. It is not that Fight Club gave them the solution to all their problems. But after coming back from the Fight Club,  petty things stopped mattering to them and unnecessary worries did not bother them anymore. People felt free. To be in the fight club is to stand at the very last and you can't be pushed back any more. You cannot be broken anymore. Slowly as Fight Club started getting bigger, it turns into massive chaos. Fight Club turns into project mayhem. And now, the narrator is sick of Tyler Durden and wants to get rid of him. Tyler takes the narrator  from one end to the other. Tyler brings the narrator back to where he took him from As Fight Club started expanding, instead of it being a group of individuals, it turns into a crowd.It develops a collective identity where everybody is of the same kind and instead of thinking independently, start repeating like a follower. Tyler Durden brings the narrator  out of this consumerist economy to prevent him from  becoming just a piece of machinery. He makes him realize his individuality. But, by the end, he himself wipes away  all the individuals and creates a machinery  for Project mayhem. Two extremists of anything are similar in its nature. Or we could say that if you go from  one extreme end of a thing to the other,then in a way, you take a round  and come back where you had started from. Because two opposite ends might look different,  but their fundamental essence is the same. Extreme action and absolute non-action are both very difficult. 15 minutes under military training feel like 45 minutes. Similarly, 15 minutes in a state of meditation also feel like 45 minutes. Both situations are so difficult that we feel as if time has slowed down. One who tries to speak English in a fake accent and one who gets pissed at someone doing it,  both values English similarly.They both think English in itself has some importance. One who believes in God without experiencing the divine and the other who denies it without experiencing the divine they both are standing in the same place. There is no fundamental difference between  a so-called theist and a so-called atheist. In a way, they are like brothers. It is very hard to empty your mind of a person  whom you passionately love or truly hate. Two extremes of anything are similar in nature. Tyler Durden pulls the narrator out of one ditch  only to push him into another.He brings him out of slavery only to push him into anarchy. Even then the narrator was running around and  even now he is caught up in the same. He was an insomniac back then  and even now he can't catch his sleep. As if the problem is still the same,  but the disease has changed. And this is our history as well. We also have just changed diseases in the name of revolution. We have changed order, changed our way of living, but even then, we are still in the same place  where we have always been.We have always been hollow and unfullied. And Tyler Durden is not  a revolutionary either. because he is not a solution. In fact, he may increase the problem. Tyler Durden is actually a symptom. He is a diagnosis of our monotonous life. He is a diagnosis of our conflicted mind. Tyler Durden is the last attempt  in embracing our individuality. He is our last effort   to awaken ourselves. Tyler is a fight between our conscious and unconscious. Tyler Durden, in some sense,  is our  revolt against our own selves.